Apache Axiom 1.2.16 Release Note
--------------------------------

Axiom 1.2.16 comes with the following new features:

*   `OMSourcedElement` support has been extended to DOOM. This is an important step towards
    full feature parity between LLOM and DOOM.

*   Axiom now ships a drop-in replacement for `abdera-parser`, so that the latest Axiom
    version can be used together with Abdera 1.1.3. See [here][1] for more details.

In addition, the sources can now be built with Java 8.

A list of other issues fixed in this release can be found [here][2].

### Changes in this release

*   The semantics of the `OMInformationItem#getOMFactory()` method have slightly changed in Axiom
    1.2.16. In previous versions, `getOMFactory()` returned the `OMFactory` instance that was used
    to create the information item. This meant that e.g. on an `OMText` node created using a
    `SOAPFactory` instance, that method would return that exact same `SOAPFactory` instance. In
    Axiom 1.2.16, `getOMFactory()` returns the `OMFactory` or `SOAPFactory` instance corresponding
    to the type of information item. For plain XML information items created using one of the
    methods defined by `OMFactory` (such as `OMText`, `OMAttribute`, as well as `OMElement`
    instances that don't implement any SOAP specific interfaces), this will always be the
    `OMFactory` instance returned by `OMMetaFactory#getOMFactory()` (and never a `SOAPFactory`
    instance). For information items created using one of the methods defined by `SOAPFactory` (i.e.
    `OMElement` instances implementing one of the SOAP interfaces, as well as `SOAPMessage`
    instances), nothing changes with respect to previous Axiom versions, and `getOMFactory()` will
    return the `SOAPFactory` instance corresponding to the SOAP version of the information item.

    The rationale for this change is that it allows to eliminate the `factory` attribute from all
    classes (except for the `SOAPMessage` implementations). It also enables significant
    simplification of the internal implementation code.

*   Some of the legacy default constructors have been removed from the
    `OMFactory`, `SOAPFactory` and `OMMetaFactory` implementations. Note that they were not part of
    the public API, but considered internal implementation details. Application code should always
    use the `OMAbstractFactory` APIs to get references to factory instances, and never refer to
    implementation classes directly.

[1]: ../implementations/fom-impl/index.html
[2]: http://s.apache.org/axiom-changes-1.2.16
